“Robot Dreams”
Isaac Asimov
“Last night I dreamed,” said LVX-1, calmly.
Susan Calvin said nothing, but her lined face, old with wisdom and experience,
seemed to undergo a microscopic twitch.
“Did you hear that?” said Linda Rash, nervously. “It’s as I told you.” She was
small, dark-haired, and young. Her right hand opened and closed, over and over.
Calvin nodded. She said, quietly, “Elvex, you will not move nor speak nor hear us
until I say your name again.”
There was no answer. The robot sat as though it were cast out of one piece of
metal, and it would stay so until it heard its name again.
Calvin said, “What is your computer entry code, Dr. Rash? Or enter it yourself if
that will make you more comfortable. I want to inspect the positronic brain pattern.”
Linda’s hands fumbled, for a moment, at the keys. She broke the process and
started again. The fine pattern appeared on the screen.
Calvin said, “Your permission, please, to manipulate your computer.”
Permission was granted with a speechless nod. Of course! What could Linda, a
new and unproven robopsychologist, do against the Living Legend?
Slowly, Susan Calvin studied the screen, moving it across and down, then up, then
suddenly throwing in a key-combination so rapidly that Linda didn’t see what had been
done, but the pattern displayed a new portion of itself altogether and had been enlarged.
Back and forth she went, her gnarled fingers tripping over the keys.
No change came over the old face. As though vast calculations were going
through her head, she watched all the pattern shifts.
Linda wondered. It was impossible to analyze a pattern without at least a handheld computer, yet the Old Woman simply stared. Did she have a computer implanted in
her skull? Or was it her brain which, for decades, had done nothing but devise, study, and
analyze the positronic brain patterns? Did she grasp such a pattern the way Mozart
grasped the notation of a symphony?
Finally Calvin said, “What is it you have done, Rash?”
Linda said, a little abashed, “I made use of fractal geometry.”
“I gathered that. But why?”
“It had never been done. I thought it would produce a brain pattern with added
complexity, possibly closer to that of the human.”
“Was anyone consulted? Was this all on your own?”
“I did not consult. It was on my own.”
Calvin’s faded eyes looked long at the young woman. “You had no right. Rash
your name; rash your nature. Who are you not to ask? I myself, I, Susan Calvin, would
have discussed this.”
“I was afraid I would be stopped.”
“You certainly would have been.”
“Am I,” her voice caught, even as she strove to hold it firm, “going to be fired?”
“Quite possibly,” said Calvin. “Or you might be promoted. It depends on what I
think when I am through.”
“Are you going to dismantle El—” She had almost said the name, which would
have reactivated the robot and been one more mistake. She could not afford another